From Hanselman it's dot com
it's Hansel minutes or weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologists. Scott Hanselman hosted by
Carl Franklin. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number one 10 recorded
live Tuesday, April 22nd, 2008. Support for
Hansel minutes is provided by
Telerik rad controls, the most
comprehensive suite of components to
windows forms and asp.net web
applications online@wwwdottelerik.com. Support is also
provided by Dutton and developers
journal. The world's leading.net developer
magazine online at www dot
dot com. In this
episode, Scott talks with Rustin
and Mike from the Microsoft
research group about the spec
sharp programming language. Hi, this
is Scott Hanselman and this
is another episode of Hansel
minutes, and I'm sitting here@theall.net
conference in Seattle, Washington with
Rustin and Mike from the
Microsoft research group, working on
a product called spec sharp
that they've just demo it
to the all.net crowd here.
Thank you gentlemen, for sitting
down with me today. Thanks
for having us. So spec
sharp, it says sharp. That
must mean it has something
to do with C sharp,
possibly the.net framework. What does
spec sharp do? Spec sharp
is a superset of C
sharp of the C sharp
language. And it adds to
the language specifications, which is
where the language gets its
name. The specifications are contracts
like pre and post conditions.
And we also enhance the
type system with nonmetal types,
for example, and with those
contracts, you can, you can
record your design decisions in
the, in the program text
and, and have them be
checked by, by various tools.
So you are a super
set of C sharp. So
you're saying that here are
some keywords and some things
that are not in C-sharp
that we've added, you can
enhance the language itself. That's
correct. So the, so we
add a few keywords, a
few new constructs here and
there. Are you your own
compiler or are you a
post compiler? We're a full
fledged compiler. So it's not
a source to source transformation.
It takes the surface syntax
and compiles it all the
way down to aisle and
creates a valid.net assemblies just
as the VB compiler or
the C sharp compiler do.
So did you have to
recreate work that was already
done by the C sharp
compiler? Yes. Cause it's completely
independent. So I mean, it's,
it does a full, you
know, parsing and co-generation and
it's the code base is
absolutely separate from the C
sharp compiler. Is that a
good thing or a bad
thing? It was a good
thing for quickly getting a,
the compiler up and running.
It was a bad thing
in the sense that now
we are a superset of
C tooo and not a
super set of seizure. I
see. But of course the
intent is to make this
something that's useful for everyone.
Cause you're trying to take
the notion of a specification
and add it to all
dominant languages. That's right. So
one of the things we're
looking at now is a
non-language based solution and we
use spec sharp as a
way to sort of paint
a picture of the future
of what it could look
like. If a language was
to fully embrace the idea
of design by contract and
make specifications of first class
citizen. But we're also working
on we've designed spec sharp
in a way that has
made it possible to peel
off layers and potentially get
those layers implemented in all.net
language. Huh? So you've added
a number of keywords to
C-sharp in order to allow
this dynamic design by contract
concept. What are some of
the keywords and explain how
I would decorate one of
my methods with these keywords.
The first one is the
upon runs across is not
the key word at all,
but just another symbol, which
is the exclamation point, the
bang. So if you write,
if you write the reference
type like T or string
or object and you follow
it by bang, making it
string bang or object bang
T bang, what you're saying
is that that type is
a type that holds a
reference that is not no.
And that's something that, that
you tend to use all
over. So in, in the
spectrum type system, we allow
programs to use non mold
types. And then the, the
type system that compiler will,
we'll make sure that just
as, as you use types
elsewhere in the program, that
you don't give a Boolean,
when a string is expected
here, it also does that
for, for normal entities. This
is a kind of an
assertion where I'm, I'm making
a declaration that the type
T shall never be no,
That's correct. That is a
kind of assertion like that.
Or you, some people even
call that they're a contract
as well. Okay. So I'm
strengthening, I'm, I'm constraining the
system such that the system
can not get into a
state, which is not what
I want. That's correct. And
for the, for the non
all types themselves, we also
support a mode where you
switch the defaults, where, where
the, the types stand for
normal types. And if you
want to the knowledgeable versions
you do like you do
with value types today in,
in C sharp, which is
to add a question Mark
afterwards, Right? So people are
familiar with being able to
say something like, and question
Mark, where suddenly a value
type, which for many years
has not been nullable it
becomes knowable. Right? Exactly. And
I can do the, the,
the inverse now with, you
know, class person, which would
initially start out in all,
if I said Persian P
equals no. And now if
I said, if it person
bang, I can't assign null
to it. That's never be
known within the scope of
the project. Exactly. Right. So
that's the, that's the simplest
keyboard or a thing that
we're adding to, to the
language simplest, at least syntactically
then the other things that
you see next are precon
preconditions and post conditions. And
they are written with the,
with a requires and ensures
which follow the signature of
the method. So you would
write a void M and
give the parameters and the
closed parenthesis, and then you
would say requires, and you
would give a Boolean condition
that says what under which
conditions the method is allowed
to be called. Okay. So
trying to visualize this, remembering
that we've got people commuting
in an audio world, and
we don't have any video
to show them, I've created
a method that takes a
string and an integer, and
before the opening curly brace,
but after the method's signature,
I'm going to say that
it is the case that
the string and this integer
meet these conditions. If one
is going to be allowed
to call this method, Right?
For example, you might say
that the, that the integer
is less than the length
of the string as an
example. Interesting. So when I
express a method, a contract,
right now, the extent of
that method contract is that
it takes these types. And
I can expand that contract
by adding overloads. And a
lot of people have asked
for things like optional parameters
and C-sharp, but you're, you're
tightening the noose as it
were. And saying that not
only w might I say
that this string must be
this length or that this
integer must be below this
value, but that they can
interrelate to each other. That's
correct. So the, so what
we do with types on
typically just express this, something
about each variable independently, and
with the contracts like pre
and post conditions, you can
very, very easily and naturally
constrain several variables at one
time. Now, the what about
the result that would be
coming back? Cause you made
the comment to avoid em,
but let's say that I've
take a string and an
integer, but I'm going to
be returning some value. And
another string, perhaps Spec sharp
has added a context, sensitive
context, dependent keyword result, and
the, that keyword can appear
in a post condition and
insurers clause, which guarantees to
callers of the method, some
condition involving the return value.
And so it stands for
the value that's being returned
from the method in the
condition. So just like when
I'm creating a property and
I'm doing a property center
and I have this keyword
called value, that is context
specific returning to the value
that's coming in to the
center. This is a keyword
that refers to what's exiting
exactly. Now I can make
posts, conditions and preconditions now
by putting in a debug
that assert at the beginning
or debug at assert at
the, at as I exit.
But why would this be
more desirable to use spec
sharp for that it's particularly
on the exit case, Right?
So the crucial difference is
that if you use debug
dot assert inside of your
method, body, it is something
that is visible to you
and to the program only
internally inside of that method,
callers of that method are
not able to take advantage
of the fact that you
happen to have put those
conditions on the code. If
you use spec sharp, then
the contracts are visible to
all callers of the method.
And the spectrum of tools
can be applied to those
callers to guarantee that the
caller will not violate the
preconditions of the method being
called and can enjoy the
benefits of what the post
condition guarantees them. For instance,
if you call string dot
can cat there's no, there's
not necessarily a guarantee that
will comes back as non
no, but if concat had
a post-condition, which said the
result is non Knoll, then
you would know that you
can freely D reference the
result that comes back from
that method without having to
do a runtime check, to
make sure that it was
non-metal to add to that
as an, as an analogy
you might consider making all
of your methods, take object
as parameters. And that is
that the type of all
of them would be object.
And inside of your method,
you would immediately cast them
to an integer or a
string or whatever it is
that you want. But by
instead of making them part
of the method signature, you're
telling callers that that's what
you expect in a similar
way by instead of using
debug that dissert inside of
your method, body, you put
pre and post conditions on
the method. You're telling something
to, to your color. That
is a really interesting way
to put it just by
having the type a signature
there you are constraining that
contract. I could certainly have
an, a, a method that
took an array of object
of indeterminate length and where
each object is. I've even
determined it type. And unfortunately
I've seen method signatures like
that in the wild that
returned then an array of
objects. And I would have
really no way of knowing
other than this is a
method called M and I'm
constraining that by adding something
as simple as method types.
So we continue to tighten
things up. So we're saying
that the domain of what
this method is responsible for
is, is smaller and smaller
and smaller. Does that make
it easier to test That
that makes, first of all,
it makes the requirements clear
what, what is expected of
the caller and what is
expected of the implementation. But
it also means that when
you, when you analyze your,
the implementation, which you could
do either by testing, which
is how it's frequently done,
or, or by some other
tools, like, for example, our
static verifier, then we only
need to consider those inputs
States that satisfy those, those
preconditioned constraints. So I'm hearing
both, do you have runtime
checking, which would be the
equivalent of what I was
saying or doing a debug
that assert, so that's happening
at runtime, but this, this
is the importance of this
being static. You have tightened
up the message signature, such
that callers of that method
signature are, are aware of
that contract, Right? W we
want to support dynamic checking
because it's an easy way
to get into the using
contracts. One adds a little
bit of code, just like
you would add to debug
that, to search somewhere. And
it's going to check some
condition when you're, when you're
running it. And at the
same time, you're recording your
design decisions in the code,
but we want to go
a step further. And so
in our, in our research,
we've spent a good bit
of effort on trying to
statically verify these things. What
we do there is we
technologically is we take the
program and convert it into
a mathematical formula, a very
large mathematical formula, but it's
typically mathematically shallow, meaning we're
not trying to prove for
a maths lesson last conjecture
or something like that. So
what we do, but there
are lots and lots of
details to check. So we
pass that to an automatic
theorem prover and the which
then analyzes the mathematical formula
to see if it's a
valid logical formula. And if
it is, that means that
the program is correct. If
it isn't, the, the theorem
prover will return to us
some mathematical counter example that
shows that it's not a
mathematically valid formula. And then
we have kept enough information.
So we can take that
mathematical counter example and bring
it back into an error
message that the, that the
programmer, the dotnet programmer will
understand things like here, you're
calling a method and you
don't satisfy the precondition, or
here you're trying to index
in array outside its bounds.
Now, previously on this podcast,
I'd spoken to palliate Dale,
Lou, and Nikolai about their
product packs. And they had
spoken of the way that
they had layered it such
that they could peel off
pieces. And they spoke to
the solver that they pass
information into. Is this in
fact, the same component? In
fact, it is the same
on the particular theorem. Prover
is called  and it's
also developed at Microsoft research.
Interesting. So there's a relationship
between the kinds of things
that PEX is trying to
solve, which is to prove
that code will run as
it is written, and that
it will, it appropriately meets
the spec and what you
guys are trying to do.
Yeah, absolutely. I'll I'll, I
would say all formal tools
like PAX and spec sharp
function by treating a program
as a mathematical object, which
it is because it's a
set of formal symbols, which
have to be that way
so that the computer can
understand it and execute the
program. And then you make
progress by using different mathematical
theories to analyze properties of
that program. Now, a lot
of talk has been made
lately of, of F sharp
and the notion of a
functional language being more easily,
mathematically provable by its very
nature. One can say that
this is proven to work
thusly. Are we trying to
take C-sharp and that same
kind of a direction, or
would it be more appropriate
to simply use a language
that was provable by its
nature? If one looks at
the, at the research that
has been done for program
verification, most of it has
been done for imperative programs,
not so much for the
functional languages, which is, which
is unfortunate. And we, because
the functional languages start off
with something that is while
as you perhaps thought of
it, that's more correct that
it's, it's, it's more rigorous
in, in some, in some
ways, you know, more things
about the things in the
program, but there's still many
different, many difficult issues in
trying to apply program verification,
even to functional programs. But
what we're trying to do
from the spectrum perspective is
we find many places where,
where, where would like to
specify that a method has
no side effects. And then
we give the opportunity to
say that it is a
pure method. Or if you
want to say that the
class is something that once
it's instances are constructed, they
don't change. You can Mark
that class to be immutable.
And those things do help
in the, in the static
verification of the programs. And
in addition, the annotations that
we have give additional documentation
to the program. Of course.
Interesting. All right. Well, I'm
going to just take a
very brief moment and we're
going to thank our sponsors
and we'll come right back.
Hi, it's Scott here from
another place in time. I
hope you're enjoying the show
so far. I apologize for
interrupting it, but I wanted
to let you know that
assembling a podcast like this
every week, isn't free. Certainly
the bandwidth bill crushes us
every month. So I wanted
to let you know that
this show is sponsored by
Tellerik. They make the show
possible and it makes it
pretty cool products as well.
For example, if you're trying
to build a web 2.0
Ajax application, trying to use
the web 1.0 components, it's
kind of difficult. You got
to get the next gen
stuff. If you want to
build the next gen websites.
And that's exactly what the
folks at Tellerik have got
and their new upcoming product,
which is code named rad
controls. Prometheus's, it's a big
pack. A web controls built
entirely on top of the
Microsoft ASP net Ajax stuff
that you already understand. It's
going to give you a
lot of performance interactivity on
your next project. They mirror
the ASP net Ajax API.
So the development's really straightforward
client scripture's shared loading time
is pretty fast. You set
a couple of properties. You
can even bind a web
services for really efficient operation.
The new rad editor for
ESPN at Ajax loads up
to four times faster than
before. And the red grid
will do thousands of records
in milliseconds. But of course
it's better to try these
things for yourself. So you
can visit  dot com
slash ASP, net Ajax, and
download a trial. Thanks a
lot for listening and we'll
get right back to the
show. So this notion of,
of side effects and an
object changing when it maybe
shouldn't change or entering a
state in which it is
inappropriate, I saw that you
had a keyword for invariant,
Correct. When people think of
contracts, they typically first think
of pre and post conditions,
but a very important aspect
of a, of a contract
is also the, the invariant,
which States properties that are,
that you intend to hold
of the status steady state
of the, of, of a
data structure. That is the
invariant says what the, what
the internal consistency of your
data structures are to verify
a program statically you need
to have in variants and
invariants are difficult to deal
with because they are not
entirely invariant. They do change
that is, there are some
points in your program where,
where the variants do not
hold. And that has probably
been one of the largest
scientific contributions that we've done
in the spectrum research project
to try to figure out
and wrestle with when, when
doing variants hold and what
do we do when they,
when they don't hold. So
that other parts of the
program don't rely on them
holding at that point. So
we do, we do allow
in variance, the variants are
checked at the end of
the constructor. And we also,
from the runtime perspective, we
only check them at the
end of of exposed statements.
So we have an exposed
statement, inspect sharp, which, which
is like a block of
code. It looks a bit
like a lock statement in
concurrent code. And it says
that within the exposed statement,
you're allowed to modify the
variables. The invariant might not
hold throughout that, but at
the end of the exposed
block, we check that the
variant holes again, interesting. So
statically in the static verifier,
we also checked the invariants
at those points. But in
addition, if you modify state
outside in the back of
an exposed block, we check
that that every assignment that
you do outside an explosive
exposed block will indeed maintain
the variance. Okay. So just
to make sure I'm hearing
correctly, the word you're using
is expos exp O S
E that's correct. So for,
for the, for the moment
that I, for the time
that I am in that
block, I am exposed. I
am in States that may
very well be inappropriate, but
I'm calling it out explicitly
and saying that by the
time I leave, I best
to be back in my
appropriate state. That's correct. Interesting.
I really like the, the
words that you you've chosen.
I find that when I'm,
you know, in object oriented
programming, certainly naming is everything.
And if you can name
it appropriately and that name
feels correct, it feels natural
that it will, it will
just allow you to use
it in a comfortable way.
And I see that you've
got assume requires insurers expose.
They're all words of similar
length. And they all feel
that they're kind of from
the same family. And it
seemed like there's a natural
extension to the language. Thank
you, keyboards are important. And
sometimes we wrestle with them
and wish we had better
ones, but the, but that's
our, our part of our
current staff. So fundamental to
what spectrum is trying to
accomplish is this notion of
really encouraging design by contract.
And from my point of
view, the most obvious contract
that we have available to
us in, in C-sharp is
this notion of an interface.
That's a very high level
construct that I can say,
I want you to can
be constrained to this interface,
to inter implement this interface,
but that's just a series
of methods that take certain,
certain parameters of certain types.
Can I apply these kinds
of spec sharp constructs to
an interface to say, not
only do I want you
to look like this, but
I wish that you behave
like this. Exactly. Spec sharp
allows all of the same
constructs. We've been talking about
it, the method level on
interface methods as well. And
it's precisely to give interfaces
behavioral descriptions that then every
implementation is obligated to live
up to. And it allows
the promise of, of, of
component programming where the only
thing you know about a
component is its interface to
have a semantic basis, as
well as just knowing that
you've conformed to the method
signatures. Yes, in retrospect, looking
at an interface and saying
that syntactically, this is anywhere
near appropriate of what I
need to get my job
done. When the semantics are
really transmitted out of band,
where out of band might
be a word document, which
is a completely inappropriate way
for, to pass semantics for
an interface. But you're saying
I can actually impose this
on things that have yet
to be written. That seems
to kind of miraculous. That
seems kind of creepy almost.
You're saying that someone can
come in totally later and
implement that interface. And you're
going to walk up back
up to the interface and
see, and con and confirm
that I am conforming to
the, the requirements to the
specification. As long as that
eventual implementation is written in
inspect sharp, then yes, the
spectrum compiler will make sure
that that implementation conforms to
all of the requirements that
the interface specifications spell out.
In addition, because spectrum is
an object oriented language, the
same holds true for subtypes.
And that's crucial in object
oriented programming, because if you're
the static type of a
parameter is a type T
when you receive that type
at runtime, it could be
a subtype of T it
doesn't necessarily have to be
a tea itself. And so
contracts in virtual methods are
also binding upon all overrides
of those methods. And that's
the way you can guarantee
the robustness of a system
that you write the system
today, and it's robust against
future evolution, or at least
more robust against future evolution
because you know, that whatever
the eventual subtype is, it
will conform to the contract
that you know about the
static. And this applies to
even abstract base classes, which
is another kind of an
interface. Yes, exactly the same
exact detailed supply to abstract
based classes. So, so what
about exceptions now? I'm starting
to feel like there's something
like checked exceptions in Java,
which people have always asked
for when it comes to
C-sharp, they're saying, where am
I checked exceptions? Maybe tell
us what the checked exceptions
are for our listeners who
may not be familiar with
that technology Check. The exceptions
are ones that the, that
the compiler will look at
how they can flow in
the, in the program so
that you can, you can
make sure that there is
some handler for, for the
check, the exception. So it's
an actually a way of
enforcing. I'm going to call
method Fu and internally somewhere,
it could throw an argument
in all exception, but what
currently in C-sharp, there's no
way for me to know
that. And there's also no
way to force the color
of Fu to have a
try catch block. That's exactly
right. So the, if you
want to, if you want
to track that in the
compiler and force the caller
to either catch it or
admit itself that it might
let one of those exceptions
through, then you would use
a checked exception. Now check
the exceptions. Are there certain
kinds of conditions in your
program where you really would
like to use the check?
The exception, an example might
be a socket closed exception
where the programmer really needs
to be aware of the
possibility that the, that the
socket might close, but you
don't want to check it
on, on every call. That
is, you don't want a
return code from every call
and have to check that
on the integration Argument against
checked exceptions, that suddenly it
litters my system with try
catch blocks or explicit calling
out that I don't care
that that's going to throw
an exception. That's right. And
in, in, in the cases
where checked exceptions are appropriate,
you would have a block
of code that, that operates
on on some object or
objects. And then you would
have a catch block at
the end. And in those
cases, the programmer really would
like to know that that
the exception is not missed.
And that's what checked exceptions
give you. Now, if you
decide then to, to let
such an exception rip through,
then, then you have to
admit to that. And then
it's the, the, the next
caller in line that, that
gets to, to deal with
it. But this is different
from the example you gave
a minute ago was the,
the NOL exception, null pointer
exception, which we consider to
not be one of these
checked exceptions, because it's not
something that, that a caller
can reasonably do something with
that is if you get
one of those exceptions or,
or an auto memory exception,
sometimes you can, you can
recover from that or, or
a CLR internal error exception,
or something like that. There's
those things could happen. And
if, if they occur, there's
something disastrous that has happened
in your program, and you
don't really expect to catch
them except maybe at the,
at the backstop and in
your main program. So Different
classes of exceptions, those ones
that I can do something
about, and there's ones that
are truly exceptional, which it
would be a really inappropriate
to call out. Correct. And
that's why we give you
the, the possibility to make,
check the exceptions for when
you want those and, and
leave. The other ones is
unchecked ones. And the, and
we, we can then do
more tracking in the compiler
of the, of the checked
ones. So if I had
a giant library, maybe even
a base class library, I
like the BCL full of
thousands and thousands and thousands
of methods that I would
want to be able to
call now that I've got
the suspect sharp mindset, I
would really say, Oh, well,
gosh, I hope that the
base class library, that.net framework
system.star was, you know, instrumented
with all of this good
information, but that's an example
of a huge chunk of
C sharp code, not spec
sharp code. And certainly, I
don't think that they're going
to convert that to spec
sharp anytime soon. How do
I get the benefits of
spec sharp? When I don't
have a spectrum library, We've
created a set of what
we call out of band
contracts for the entire base
class library. Spec sharp compiler
can be run in a
special mode where it will
compile a file that contains
no code, but only the
contracts and marks the resulting
assembly, such that the rest
of the spec sharp tools
look glued together. The original
runtime assembly, such as ms.
Core lib and the out
of band contract for ms.
Coral hub. So that it
looks inside the tool as
if the contracts had been
there from the beginning. Now,
in one sense, that's a
lie because the contracts weren't
there. And so we created
these contracts. We think they're
reasonable. We think they're accurate,
but it would be so
much better if the actual
library itself came with its
own contracts that were guaranteed
by having been written in
the code in the place.
And we are, you know,
have been exploring for several
years now with different product
groups in Microsoft to try
to, to make progress on
that front and be able
to provide a mechanism where
the library providers will provide
their own form of the
library of the contracts. Interesting.
We have out of band
documentation, we have PDB files,
and then we could potentially
have these contract files. Certainly
it would be ideal if
this were built into the
language. So it seems to
me like, I would want
to press start pressuring Anders,
the inventor of C-sharp, and
maybe the listeners would want
to know what's the best
way they can get C-sharp
spec sharp built in. You
guys are Microsoft research, right?
You're not a product group.
You're doing this to push
the concept forward, but I
assume you've met with Anders
and you've told them about
this several times, but he's
got a lot on his
plate. How can the listeners
get involved? How can we
get people to, to force
Anders, to listen at this
great idea and get this
built into C sharp? Well,
every time we've talked to
unders he's been quite supportive
of both the goals of
the spectra project and the
things we've been able to
accomplish the tools we've produced.
He is indicated that the
important thing is to know
that there's users out there
that want it, and that
can take advantage of it.
And so I would say
for any listener, who's interested,
they should download spec sharp,
which is publicly available for
free from the Microsoft research
website and, you know, use
it and see if it's
useful for their code and
then make noise about it
and makes either send email
or post, you know, on
blogs or Yeah. Presenters or
groups. Exactly. Whatever it takes.
Absolutely. So in conclusion here,
I want to make sure
I understand the scope of
this because it's not just
runtime type checking. There's this
fundamental notion of being able
to statically prove that this
is, is correct. When I
saw your demo earlier, I
got, I got to see
a little green squiggly and
I had, we've seen squiggles
before in, in visual studio.
Red squiggly is that I
usually can compare it to
being like spelling errors is
your syntactical issues. And I
had made the comment to
you that the green squiggly
is, felt like a grammar
issue, but you had made
you use it. That was
wrongheaded because you can extend
this grammar Right. In, in
the wonderful squiggly that we're
used to in, in Microsoft
word, both the, the red
one for spelling mistakes and
the green one for, for
gram grammatical errors D are
quite similar to, to what
we provide in that the
wheel has come up at
design time. That is, as
you're sitting there typing your
program and the, the squeak
least appear and go away.
And, and as you go
along, the difference is that
that with our squeak lease,
when they, when they appear,
there are ways that you
can suppress them. That is,
they warn you about some
condition in, in Microsoft word.
If you've made a grammar
mistake, you can fix it.
But in some cases, the
grammar checker is just not
clever to do what you,
what you wanted to do.
And then, then you can
just turn off the, the
check, but in spectrum, you
can do something better, which
is that, that you can
explain to him why this
is correct. For example, if
you, if you use one
of your parameters as an,
as an array index, perhaps
inside your inside of your
method, and you get to
complain about it, then maybe
the way to do it,
to, to tell the checker
that you're still doing. The
right thing is to add
a precondition to your method
that says, well, this is
not my responsibility. It's the
responsibility of the caller to
give me a good value.
And then the, the green
squiggly will go away. Your
code remains as it is,
but now you've made that
contract explicit. Yeah. Interesting, fantastic.
So people can go and
download spec sharp. Now they
can play with this. Now
they can instrument their code.
You had mentioned that there
were two different modes for
this. There was a C
sharp mode and a spec
sharp mode, Right? The, the
standard mode that, that we
use in inside, for example,
our program verifier itself, which
is written in spec sharp,
it's maybe about 65,000 lines
of spec sharp right now
is to use the, the
spec sharp mode in visual
studio. Unfortunately, that's that mode
has some drawbacks because we
have not put in all
of the whizzbang functionality that
you get in the, in
the seizure visual C-sharp mode
for, in, in visual studio.
Okay. That means that, that
you, you get our additional
design time support in, in
that mode, but for programmers
who, who either would like
to, to keep all of
the refactoring and all of
the code formatting and features
that are really nice to
use in C sharp, they
can use, they can download
spectrum. Then in the properties
tab, properties, pain of the,
of the project, we add
a new contracts tab, and
one can turn on contracts.
What happens then is when
you then compile your C
sharp program, you first run
the C sharp compiler, and
then immediately afterwards, we run
the spectrum, compiler the spec
sharp compiler then would produce
the same result as the
C sharp compiler. But, but
the spectrum of compiler is
also going to peek into
specially marked comments. So what
you can do with a
precondition is if you put
it into a comment that
begins with a carrot sign,
then it that's just a
common to the C sharp
compiler, but the spectrum of
compiler will, we'll read it
and understand it and generate
code based on that. Now
I'm realizing that some listeners
who are a little more
familiar with these kinds of
concepts may think that this
is a lot, like some
of the aspect oriented compilers
that have come out, prosy
sharp, like X, C sharp,
where you could decorate C-sharp
with a, an attribute and
say that I wish to
insert tracing pre and post
conditions. How is this different
from those kinds of aspect
oriented things? In many ways,
it's quite similar. A pre
and post conditions of course
can be thought of as
aspects because they slice into
a particular well-defined joint point.
The difference with spec sharp
is that the Checking we
do is something that goes
the static checking we do
is something that goes far
beyond what an aspect oriented
tool would be capable of.
And aspect oriented tool is
capable of injecting code into
the runtime for dynamic behavior.
But our static verification relies
upon a particular discipline of
how you write your programs
and use your fields in
your objects to guarantee their
correctness and robustness against future
code evolution. And so the,
the surface syntax in that
sense would be the same.
It's like putting an attribute
on a method. It's something
that the C-sharp compiler ignores,
but the value then is
in the tools that we
can apply to that code
afterwards. And I say, okay,
so I could see myself
using an aspect oriented type
of a system in conjunction,
respect sharp, but other than
that initial superficial similarity in
that there are pre and
post conditions. And these are
like, as you said, the
joint points, that's about where
the similarity ends. And it's
really about static verification of
the correctness of, of, of
your application. So presumably then
I should be able to
access that information and then
generate documentation from it. Yes.
The, the information is there.
And one could extract it
into, into a document that
reads in English or with
the, with a formula tube
to describe what the documentation
ought to say. So was
almost like spec sharp enforces
my comments. Yes. The it's
a way to formalize your
comments, that he's put them
into something that is going
to be read by the
machine. And if you won't
do that, also checked by
machine by, by the machine
to make sure that they're
up to date with the,
with the current program text.
Very cool. I think that
anything that allows the programmer
to more explicitly and formally
express their intent, such that
it is unambiguous and in
a machine readable format is
definitely a really good thing.
That's right. It's expressing intent
is all about what contracts
are about. Cool. Well, thank
you very much. Rusden and
Mike, from the Microsoft research
team, and again, the product
is spec sharp, and you
can download that. We'll have
links up on the show
site. Thank you very much.
Thank you. And this has
been another episode of Hanselminutes
and we'll see you again
next week.